asexual reproduction in organic
reproduction is the fundamental feature
to all known life each individual
organism exists as the result of
reproduction the known methods of
reproduction are broadly grouped into
two main types sexual and asexual
asexual reproduction is a mode of
reproduction by which offspring arise
from a single parent and inherit the
genes of that parent only there are
several types of asexual reproduction
such as one binary fission 2
regeneration 3 vegetative propagation
for budding and five spore formation the
process of asexual reproduction in which
in binary fission the parent organism is
replaced by two daughter organisms
because it literally divides into two a
good example of the same is a
single-celled organism like Paramecium
in this case the process of reproduction
begins with the division of its nucleus
into nuclei this is followed by division
of its body into two each part receiving
a nucleus finally two Paramecium are
born from the single parent cell in case
of unicellular organisms cell division
of fission leads to the creation of new
individuals many different patterns of
binary fission have been observed many
bacteria and protozoa simply split into
two equal halves during cell division on
the other hand some single-celled
organisms such as malarial parasite
plasmodium divide into many daughter
cells simultaneously by multiple fission
we now move on to another type of
asexual reproduction called regeneration
simple animals like plumeria can be cut
into any number of pieces and each piece
grows into a complete organism this
process is called as regeneration
regeneration is carried out by
specialized cells which proliferate and
make large number of cells sexual
reproduction in animals we have already
discussed sexual reproduction in plants
let us now discuss sexual reproduction
in animals to understand the sexual
reproduction we should first know the
meaning of general terms like gametes
fertilization and puberty first let us
understand the role of gameit's
in sexual reproduction sexual
reproduction takes place by the
combination of special reproductive
cells called sex cells these sex cells
in sexual reproduction are called
gametes
the gametes are two types male gametes
female gametes
the male gamete in animals is called
sperm and the female gamete in animals
is called an egg
sperm is very small in structure its
structure is divided into three parts
namely head body and tail sperm has a
long tail which makes it motile
egg is larger in shape then sperm it
contains the water and stored food
gametes fuse to give a new individual
this process is known as fertilization
the fusion of a male gamete with a
female gamete to form a zygote during
the sexual reproduction is called
fertilization the zygote is actually the
fertilized egg or ovum there are two
modes of fertilization in animals
internal fertilization external
fertilization
first let us discuss internal
fertilization the fertilization which
occurs inside the female body is called
internal fertilization internal
fertilization occurs in reptiles and
birds mammals like human beings etc in
this type of fertilization mail
transfers the sperms inside the female
body during mating
now let us discuss external
fertilization
the fertilization which occurs outside
the female body is called external
fertilization external fertilization
occurs in frogs and toads in this type
of fertilization male and female animals
transfers the sperms and eggs in water
and with the collisions of sperms
and eggs eggs get fertilized